---
browser_title:  Webby
title:          Webby
name:           Webby
created_at:     2009-01-06 19:06:18.926374 -08:00
filter:
  - wikiwords
  - erb
  - textile
  - outline
---

<%= render :partial => '/toc' %>




h2. Configurations


h3. Sitefile

Site file allows you to setup global configuration variables like <code>SITE.ouptput_dir</code>, <code>SITE.local_dir</code> etc.
Here is a sample:

<% uv :lang => 'shell-unix-generic' do -%>
  task :default => :build

  desc 'deploy the site to the webserver'
  task :deploy => [:build, 'deploy:rsyc_mac_local']

  SITE.local_dir   = '/Volumes/reference_deployment/'
  # SITE.create_mode = 'directory' # when call create:page command it'll create directory with an index

  SITE.uv[:theme] = 'twilight'
  SITE.uv[:line_numbers] = false

  task :autobuild => :growl
  # EOF
<% end -%>




h2. Webby Commands 

Use <code>webby -T</code> to get a list of available command.  <code>webby -T</code> is basically like <code>rake -T</code>. 
You can specify a task <code>webby -T [task]</code> to search for tasks matching the given PATTERN. 
As with Rake you can use <code>webby -D</code> for a more detailed description. 

<% uv :lang => 'shell-unix-generic' do -%>
  > webby -T
  
  webby autobuild              # Continuously build the website
  webby build                  # Build the website
  webby clobber                # Delete the website
  webby create:page            # Create a new page
  webby create:partial         # Create a new partial
  webby deploy                 # deploy the site to the webserver
  webby deploy:rsyc_mac_local  # Rsync to local file system
  webby deploy:rsync           # Deploy to the server using rsync
  webby deploy:ssh             # Deploy to the server using ssh
  webby rebuild                # Rebuild the website
  webby validate               # Alias to validate:internal
  webby validate:external      # Validate hyperlinks (include external sites)
  webby validate:internal      # Validate hyperlinks (exclude exteranl sites)
<% end -%>  


h3. Webby Tasks

Webby tasks are like rake tasks are just rake tasks.  They are stored in _/tasks/*.rake_. 
Here is a sample task to deploy the output to a local nfs mount on server using <code>rysnc</code>.

<% uv :lang => 'ruby' do -%>
  namespace :deploy do
    desc 'Rsync to local file system'
    task :rsyc_mac_local do
      sh "rsync -avz --delete --exclude .DS_Store  --exclude .cairn  #{SITE.output_dir}/ #{SITE.local_dir}"
    end # task :rsyc_mac_local
  end  # namespace :deploy
<% end -%>